THE HORSE-STEALERS

A HOSPITAL assistant, called Yergunov, an empty-headed fellow, known
throughout the district as a great braggart and drunkard, was returning
one evening in Christmas week from the hamlet of Ryepino, where he had
been to make some purchases for the hospital. That he might get home in
good time and not be late, the doctor had lent him his very best horse.

At first it had been a still day, but at eight o’clock a violent snow-
storm came on, and when he was only about four miles from home Yergunov
completely lost his way.

He did not know how to drive, he did not know the road, and he drove on
at random, hoping that the horse would find the way of itself. Two hours
passed; the horse was exhausted, he himself was chilled, and already
began to fancy that he was not going home, but back towards Ryepino. But
at last above the uproar of the storm he heard the far-away barking of a
dog, and a murky red blur came into sight ahead of him: little by
little, the outlines of a high gate could be discerned, then a long
fence on which there were nails with their points uppermost, and beyond
the fence there stood the slanting crane of a well. The wind drove away
the mist of snow from before the eyes, and where there had been a red
blur, there sprang up a small, squat little house with a steep thatched
roof. Of the three little windows one, covered on the inside with
something red, was lighted up.

What sort of place was it? Yergunov remembered that to the right of the
road, three and a half or four miles from the hospital, there was Andrey
Tchirikov’s tavern. He remembered, too, that this Tchirikov, who had
been lately killed by some sledge-drivers, had left a wife and a
daughter called Lyubka, who had come to the hospital two years before as
a patient. The inn had a bad reputation, and to visit it late in the
evening, and especially with someone else’s horse, was not free from
risk. But there was no help for it. Yergunov fumbled in his knapsack for
his revolver, and, coughing sternly, tapped at the window-frame with his
whip.

“Hey! who is within?” he cried. “Hey, granny! let me come in and get
warm!”

With a hoarse bark a black dog rolled like a ball under the horse’s
feet, then another white one, then another black one—there must have
been a dozen of them. Yergunov looked to see which was the biggest,
swung his whip and lashed at it with all his might. A small, long-legged
puppy turned its sharp muzzle upwards and set up a shrill, piercing
howl.

Yergunov stood for a long while at the window, tapping. But at last the
hoar-frost on the trees near the house glowed red, and a muffled female
figure appeared with a lantern in her hands.

“Let me in to get warm, granny,” said Yergunov. “I was driving to the
hospital, and I have lost my way. It’s such weather, God preserve us.
Don’t be afraid; we are your own people, granny.”

“All my own people are at home, and we didn’t invite strangers,” said
the figure grimly. “And what are you knocking for? The gate is not
locked.”

Yergunov drove into the yard and stopped at the steps.

“Bid your labourer take my horse out, granny,” said he.

“I am not granny.”

And indeed she was not a granny. While she was putting out the lantern
the light fell on her face, and Yergunov saw black eyebrows, and
recognized Lyubka.

“There are no labourers about now,” she said as she went into the house.
“Some are drunk and asleep, and some have been gone to Ryepino since the
morning. It’s a holiday. . . .”

As he fastened his horse up in the shed, Yergunov heard a neigh, and
distinguished in the darkness another horse, and felt on it a Cossack
saddle. So there must be someone else in the house besides the woman and
her daughter. For greater security Yergunov unsaddled his horse, and
when he went into the house, took with him both his purchases and his
saddle.

The first room into which he went was large and very hot, and smelt of
freshly washed floors. A short, lean peasant of about forty, with a
small, fair beard, wearing a dark blue shirt, was sitting at the table
under the holy images. It was Kalashnikov, an arrant scoundrel and
horse-stealer, whose father and uncle kept a tavern in Bogalyovka, and
disposed of the stolen horses where they could. He too had been to the
hospital more than once, not for medical treatment, but to see the
doctor about horses—to ask whether he had not one for sale, and whether
his honour would not like to swop his bay mare for a dun-coloured
gelding. Now his head was pomaded and a silver ear-ring glittered in his
ear, and altogether he had a holiday air. Frowning and dropping his
lower lip, he was looking intently at a big dog’s-eared picture-book.
Another peasant lay stretched on the floor near the stove; his head, his
shoulders, and his chest were covered with a sheepskin—he was probably
asleep; beside his new boots, with shining bits of metal on the heels,
there were two dark pools of melted snow.

Seeing the hospital assistant, Kalashnikov greeted him.

“Yes, it is weather,” said Yergunov, rubbing his chilled knees with his
open hands. “The snow is up to one’s neck; I am soaked to the skin, I
can tell you. And I believe my revolver is, too. . . .”

He took out his revolver, looked it all over, and put it back in his
knapsack. But the revolver made no impression at all; the peasant went
on looking at the book.

“Yes, it is weather. . . . I lost my way, and if it had not been for the
dogs here, I do believe it would have been my death. There would have
been a nice to-do. And where are the women?”

“The old woman has gone to Ryepino, and the girl is getting supper ready
. . .” answered Kalashnikov.

Silence followed. Yergunov, shivering and gasping, breathed on his
hands, huddled up, and made a show of being very cold and exhausted. The
still angry dogs could be heard howling outside. It was dreary.

“You come from Bogalyovka, don’t you?” he asked the peasant sternly.

“Yes, from Bogalyovka.”

And to while away the time Yergunov began to think about Bogalyovka. It
was a big village and it lay in a deep ravine, so that when one drove
along the highroad on a moonlight night, and looked down into the dark
ravine and then up at the sky, it seemed as though the moon were hanging
over a bottomless abyss and it were the end of the world. The path going
down was steep, winding, and so narrow that when one drove down to
Bogalyovka on account of some epidemic or to vaccinate the people, one
had to shout at the top of one’s voice, or whistle all the way, for if
one met a cart coming up one could not pass. The peasants of Bogalyovka
had the reputation of being good gardeners and horse-stealers. They had
well-stocked gardens. In spring the whole village was buried in white
cherry-blossom, and in the summer they sold cherries at three kopecks a
pail. One could pay three kopecks and pick as one liked. Their women
were handsome and looked well fed, they were fond of finery, and never
did anything even on working-days, but spent all their time sitting on
the ledge in front of their houses and searching in each other’s heads.

But at last there was the sound of footsteps. Lyubka, a girl of twenty,
with bare feet and a red dress, came into the room. . . . She looked
sideways at Yergunov and walked twice from one end of the room to the
other. She did not move simply, but with tiny steps, thrusting forward
her bosom; evidently she enjoyed padding about with her bare feet on the
freshly washed floor, and had taken off her shoes on purpose.

Kalashnikov laughed at something and beckoned her with his finger. She
went up to the table, and he showed her a picture of the Prophet Elijah,
who, driving three horses abreast, was dashing up to the sky. Lyubka put
her elbow on the table; her plait fell across her shoulder—a long
chestnut plait tied with red ribbon at the end—and it almost touched the
floor. She, too, smiled.

“A splendid, wonderful picture,” said Kalashnikov. “Wonderful,” he
repeated, and motioned with his hand as though he wanted to take the
reins instead of Elijah.

The wind howled in the stove; something growled and squeaked as though a
big dog had strangled a rat.

“Ugh! the unclean spirits are abroad!” said Lyubka.

“That’s the wind,” said Kalashnikov; and after a pause he raised his
eyes to Yergunov and asked:

“And what is your learned opinion, Osip Vassilyitch—are there devils in
this world or not?”

“What’s one to say, brother?” said Yergunov, and he shrugged one
shoulder. “If one reasons from science, of course there are no devils,
for it’s a superstition; but if one looks at it simply, as you and I do
now, there are devils, to put it shortly. . . . I have seen a great deal
in my life. . . . When I finished my studies I served as medical
assistant in the army in a regiment of the dragoons, and I have been in
the war, of course. I have a medal and a decoration from the Red Cross,
but after the treaty of San Stefano I returned to Russia and went into
the service of the Zemstvo. And in consequence of my enormous
circulation about the world, I may say I have seen more than many
another has dreamed of. It has happened to me to see devils, too; that
is, not devils with horns and a tail—that is all nonsense—but just, to
speak precisely, something of the sort.”

“Where?” asked Kalashnikov.